# Epigenetic-Markers-for-Ischemic-Stroke-Masters-Thesis-
In this study, we employed differential gene expression analysis in conjunction with differential methylation analysis and machine learning to explore common molecular features associated with large artery atherosclerosis, small artery atherosclerosis, and cardioembolic ischemic stroke. We identified differentially expressed epigenetic factors such as PRDM5, BAZ2B and TTK that showed matching expression trends across all 3 subtypes and were implicated in stroke biology, underscoring their potential to serve as epigenetic biomarkers of ischemic stroke. 

We also identified differentially methylated regions such as PRKCH, COL5A3 and MYBPH and correlated them with DEGs and found conserved methylation and expression signatures across the subtypes. Finally, we used logistic regression, random forest and xgboost to build classifiers in order to showcase the predictive ability of DEGs and DE epigenetic factors in classifying IS from controls. The model using the most exhaustive feature set of 1868 DEGs performed the best across most evaluation metrics, achieving the highest accuracy of 0.88 using SVM and the highest PR-AUC of 0.98 using logistic regression. We found genes like MLC1, NCAM1 and LONRF1 to be of high feature importance. These genes were also DE across all 3 stroke subtypes, indicating their importance and role in global stroke pathogenesis. The model, which utilised a feature set of only 46 epigenetic factors differentially expressed in IS compared to controls, performed almost as well as the best-performing model, achieving an accuracy of 0.88 using SVM and a PR-AUC of 0.98 using xgboost. This showcases that epigenetic regulators, as the sole features, can distinguish between IS and healthy controls fairly well, highlighting the key role of epigenetic mechanisms in stroke pathogenesis and their potential as standalone biomarkers for ischemic stroke. From this model, we identified SAP30 to be of high feature importance as well as being differentially expressed in ischemic stroke patients as compared to controls, indicating its potential role in stroke biology. 

Therefore, our study demonstrates that integrating omics and machine learning approaches enables robust classification of ischemic stroke patients from healthy controls. This underscores the potential of data-driven methodologies to enhance our understanding of ischemic stroke as a condition.
